hey guys we have one more artist talk
for you today or a speaker talk for you
today um I'm thrilled to introduce Matt
puit who is a technologist and lawyer he
is president of radical exchange
Foundation where his work focuses on
institutional design his current
projects include a collaboration with
London Serpentine Galleries and Thomas
saso Studios on reimagining Art
ownership looking forward to this one
handing it over to
mat all right thank you uh thanks to the
organizers for having me um and I'm glad
to be talking to you all today uh so uh
my name is Matt puit uh basically my
story is that I used to be an antitrust
uh litigator um and in that capacity was
sort of thinking about thinking about
economic Justice and thinking about the
way that power tends to concentrate in
institutions and uh I got frustrated
litigating I I don't I just came to the
conclusion that the uh obstacles to that
strategy for changing the way that
institutions work in this Society is
just not going to make enough progress
in my lifetime so I became interested in
other ways of uh thinking about you know
sharing power and reimagining
institutions um and that led me to the
uh radical exchange project which uh
which is a nonprofit where we basically
think about how to improve the basic
institutions of society like how to make
voting systems work better how to make
property systems work better from kind
of a formal perspective but animated by
values of you know how can we uh you
know how can we experiment with new ways
of doing these basic things that share
power in a more uh felicitous way way uh
so this is a quote from uh the
sociologist Emil durkheim that I like if
the holder of a uh real property right
could always exercise it without ever
going Beyond bounds with each person
remaining in his own domain there would
be no reason for any legal
relationship um I think that's a it's a
it's a a telling quote and hopefully
it'll cast some light on what I'll what
I'm about to talk
about so first thing I'll do is I'll
I'll I'll I'll talk a little bit about
private property I think private
property it's it's just it's unavoidable
that we talk about this basic
institution in society um in order to
sort of understand the uh the kind of
work that we want to do the kind of
institutional experimentation that uh
that we want to do I'll then introduce
this idea of partial common ownership
which is uh um probably requires a
little bit longer to like fully
understand but I'll try to give the uh a
fast uh uh sense of it uh and then I'll
talk a little bit about the
collaboration on art ownership that we
are doing with Tomas sareno and the
communities of the selenis grandes in
Argentina uh so I think a pretty good
like uh you know just sort of uh the
quick way of understanding the basic
principle of of capitalism is uh given
by the wonderful movie uh There Will Be
Blood um and if you haven't seen that
movie the uh in this final scene the uh
the the the cruel and uh sadistic uh uh
oil Miner is confronting this guy whose
life that he's already ruined and he's
humiliated the guy has come to him hat
in hand and said will you please buy my
parcel you know I've resisted selling to
you for all these years but will you
please buy it now uh I I need the money
and he says I'm no I'm going to give you
nothing I don't need to buy it because
I'm the I have drilled on my land which
I own which is near yours and uh from
from my Wells I'm able to suck out the
oil from underneath the ground uh which
flows over from from from your land so I
drink your milkshake is the uh is is the
slogan right and um the idea is the the
the evocative image to me is that sort
of underneath the
surface underneath the surface there's
like one pool of value that that that
individual property rights allow allow
us to to draw
from um so I drink your milkshake
another really powerful illustration of
the I drink your milkshake principle is
was given by the 19th century Economist
uh Henry George who was a land reformer
who was thinking about private property
and land and George's basic Insight was
that if uh if you are the owner of an
unimproved uh uh parcel of land uh as
that as the value of that land increases
what's what's going on is that the the
value created by the non-owners around
the land the network of people who are
going about their lives participating in
cultural economic social activity in
proximity to the land they are the ones
that are making the land valuable where
the owner of the land is drinking their
milk shake uh so it's it's a very deep
and interesting principle and the and
Henry George was thinking about you know
how to uh how to address that problem in
the context of land ownership and that
is very much the same kind of a problem
that uh radical exchanges work on uh on
on property um is is is addressing
itself
too uh so there's this idea that that uh
you
know property rights are giving creating
a possibility to sort of extract um
extract value um but this idea of of
extracting value I mean there's there's
a reason for it it's not it's not
completely just uh you know uh uh
cruelty and Malice that has that has led
these institutions to come about right
the the the the flip side of that is
that so if You' imagine just literally
imagine a milk shake and you imagine
putting a straw into it and starting to
suck the milkshake out what's going on
actually is that is that where
previously you had you know a disordered
heat bath of just randomly moving
particles inside the milkshake and some
you start sucking them out through a
straw now suddenly order emerges in the
milkshake right now the the particles
are all moving towards that that straw
so there's the imposition of order
through um through the the power that
private property rights create um and
the flip side of that
is that you know is that that that you
know principle of imposition of order
can go too far can create monoculture it
can destroy diversity and it has nothing
to do with Justice you know it can it
can create the worst kinds of Injustice
so there's a very subtle kind of balance
that our institutions need to be trying
to strike and but these principles are
sometimes so abstract and so complex
that we we lose sight of them and and
things get out of whack and so what we
need to be doing is thinking about how
to um uh thinking about how to restore
um uh principles of of of of justice and
and balance in our um in in our basic
institutions um so you can sort of think
of these you know this idea of order and
this this idea of monoculture Injustice
as as things that need to be need to be
brought into balance and uh radical
exchange is thinking about um uh uh
private property and partial common
ownership is an attempt to to do
that uh so okay okay so just a quick
sort of U dive into what uh I mean by
partial common ownership so you can
think of a uh
um actually this there's an error in
this graphic here this is meant to just
be the the you can think of a
traditional ownership interest which is
meant to just be sort of one rectangle
and then you can split that interest
apart into into two into two different
interests and this is what partial
common ownership is attempting to
do um it's sort it's taking the sort of
of bundle of rights that that comprise a
private property right and breaking them
apart in a sort of an unfamiliar um an
interesting
way um
so um okay so we we we imagine pulling
the pulling a private property right
apart on the one on on the one hand
we're creating a sort of a a a temp a
paral common ownership license which is
a
temporary uh uh a temporary license to
use something held by like an individual
Steward of of of the owned object and
then on the other hand we're creating uh
residual rights which are more permanent
and which are held by a community as
opposed to an
individual uh the stewardship license
basically amounts to a license to sort
of to possess or use or kind of act like
the owner of of an of an object or or an
interest it lasts for a certain period
of time this might be a year or less or
more after that period of time it it
mandatorily is sort of re auctioned and
the idea of the of the re auction is
that the the the winning bid in the
auction is paid to to the prior
Steward uh uh so
um uh so that you know basically uh the
the prior Steward can can put in another
bid and sort of win win a second term as
the steward if they do that then they
don't have to pay themselves anything if
someone else wins the auction then that
amount goes to the steward so the
steward is sort of compensated for you
know whatever they paid for it before it
might go up a little bit it might go
down a little bit but some percentage of
the of the of the uh uh of the winning
auction bid is uh is paid as a fee which
goes back to a broader community so you
can think of the broader Community as
representing like the network around a
piece of land the the more General uh
set of interests uh which are creating
the value in in an object so the the
community is sort of collecting these
fees from each auction uh in in
perpetuity and the community can also
sort of exercise um uh uh governance
type rights you know so setting setting
limits on on use setting you know rules
for how the how the object of ownership
can be uh U can be used and other kinds
of you can imagine you know there's a
whole sort of design space here um
another thing I should mention which I I
think is important to keep in mind is
that when we when you set up this sort
of auction process it could be a global
auction that is open to everyone or it
could be you know uh sort of restricted
to some set of some some smaller
Community which is able to
participate
um uh so what you're doing here is
you're creating a uh on the one hand a
kind of a unitary interest in the hands
of a of a steward which is giving like a
practical um Power to to manage and
incent incentives for active and
efficient management of of an interest
and then on the other side you're
creating this
fractional uh more distributed uh stream
of um of of returns that can be held by
a community and perhaps even like a
dynamically defined Community without
undermining the efficiency of the
management of the uh of the asset so
this is a this is a an idea that comes
from the field of mechanism design I
think it's quite it's quite it's a
clever way of splitting apart ownership
interests um in a way that gives us an
opportunity to explore new ways of
thinking about ownership new ways of
building networks of powers sharing that
attach to uh that attach to
assets um and what radical exchange
really wants to do is to um encourage
that kind of experimentation to take
these kinds of ideas and bring them into
uh contact with reality so that we we
can learn about how they work so that we
can take ideas that seem promising on
paper and learn like is there actually a
possibility of taking this theoretically
interesting idea and incorporating it
into the real institutions through which
we share power in a way that makes
things better um there's a you know
there's a very an interesting
theoretical argument that uh partial
common ownership can actually be more
efficient than traditional ownership and
so what this does is I think it creates
in a way a moral obligation even if you
think that um you know even if you think
that that basically the traditional
ownership interests and traditional
private property works pretty well um
this argument that partial common
ownership could actually create more
efficiency um creates an obligation to
at least I think try this at least
experiment with this new form of um of
possession um
because one of the most important just
you know often heard justifications for
private property interests is that
they're needed for for efficiency so I
think this is a this is a I feel that
this is something that we kind of have
an obligation to to explore and and to
test out and but because it's so kind of
unfamiliar because it's such an
unfamiliar way of splitting apart
ownership interests um it's uh it
demands kind of an imaginative context I
think to to to uh introduce this into
into the culture and this is where I I
think it's really exciting to work with
artists in um uh in exploring
this so um so we radical exchange has um
uh in in in recent months uh worked on a
project that we're calling uh PCO art uh
which where we've basically we've built
a a token system uh that kind of
subverts the you know kind of it sort of
turns the speculative logic of
traditional nfts on its head it makes
these makes these you know tokens things
that are very difficult to speculate to
speculate on and are instead basically
um tokens uh rep that can represent a
network of of stewards in a common
project um you know B and this is you
know based on the I uh principles of
partial common ownership that I that I
just explained um we have worked with uh
Serpentine gallery in in London and our
friends at geoweb uh which is a very
interesting um uh uh uh technical group
of of of of Engineers uh to to build
this system and uh the first sort of um
uh major project where we're going to
roll this out and test it is a
collaboration with the Argentine artist
uh Tomas
sareno uh Tomas sareno a major theme
running through uh uh tomas's work in
recent years is his collaboration with
uh the communities of the selus Grandes
uh in Argentina which are um communities
that are um uh resisting the uh effects
of uh lithium extraction in the Salt
Flats uh in the in the area of Argentina
where they uh where they're from uh this
is so uh Tom tomas's recent um uh
exhibit at Serpentine in London um uh
what includes a film it includes a
number of different uh works that are
all kind of connected to his
collaboration with the Selena Grandes
community and with the um uh uh the the
sort of exploitative process of of
extraction that is that is going on
there um the uh the uh the cloud
imagination project is part of that work
and that's what we're we're working with
um with with him on and with with his
studio and the community on um so the
way that the way that it will work is
you can you can sort of think about um
you can think about the I'm trying to
find the right photograph here here we
go so the the uh the the lithium
extraction process um uh basically
drains the drains aquafers and Water
Supplies in the in the area because it
it requires that you create these
gigantic sort of evaporation pools in
the um in the Salt Flat to um uh uh to
get the lithium and in these in these
Flats you can sort of see the reflection
of of the clouds and there's these
there's these interesting sort of um uh
um images that that emerge in the uh
through the interaction of the of of the
desert and the Salt Flat and these pools
and and and the clouds which which again
also have water so this sort of theme of
water is running through a lot of the
work and uh what
um what the cloud imagination project
has done is it's it's invited um uh
children around the world including
children in the selenis Grandes
communities and also children in who are
visiting the gallery in uh uh in London
uh to to look at these images uh of
clouds and and sort of project their
their imagination onto them by drawing
um uh drawing pictures in the clouds
each of these images becomes a um
becomes a work which can be held uh
according to a uh a partial common
ownership license or one of these
Steward licenses so in other words you
can this will create a network of
stewards who are are are are holding
each of these works created by children
around the world but also potentially
you know some of them might end up being
created by prominent artists you you
know who uh who collaborate with the
project and create their own uh their
own images of of cloud drawings um and
um um uh and thereby create you know a a
big network of uh of of partial common
own partial partial common ownership um
uh Works which can be passed around in
perpetuity and and generate a stream of
U of of income that will support the
Selena Grandes uh communities um so this
this website you can you can already um
visit it and
um create your own drawing um by sort of
just just tracing tracing what you see
and
um um you
know imagining what you see in the
clouds and uh create your own sort of uh
asset which will become part of part of
this project um
so that's the uh really excited about
the uh this collaboration which uh which
will which will become uh the sort of
whole system will uh will hopefully go
public in a in a project together should
should be December January um when uh
when this project is is is ready to go
out and onto auction and and um uh uh
and we'll really see how large numbers
of people interact through the through
partial common ownership um but I think
it's also important just to note that
this this system that we've built for
partial common ownership can be used in
all kinds of different situations and
all kinds of other interesting artistic
collaborations and more so you can
imagine for example uh works of art that
are um that require really active
maintenance over a long period of time
right this is uh this is sort of a
notoriously difficult um question for
stewardship of of of Art paral common
ownership is an interesting way of
managing that sort of the right to
Steward uh you know work of art like um
you know sort of a complex installation
work or work that in you requires the
maintenance of uh of software or these
kinds of things things that require
active maintenance uh are a good fit for
um you know creating Steward licenses um
uh in Lee of Simply you know uh selling
a right to the work and then you know
cutting ties between the artist and the
background community and The Collector
forever um the uh so other interesting
possibilities include using partial
common ownership to uh to create
licensing arrangements for for data for
the use of information and um uh and you
know
many any number of other kinds of um uh
you know creative creative uses in
involving either digital assets or um or
or physical ones uh or or you know bits
of intellectual property um so I will
I'll stop there uh thank you very much
and um happy to to you know to talk to
any of you and and and get to know you
um in the rest of the
[Applause]
day